---
title: "Speciation of Niobium in hydrothermal fluids."
collection: publications
boardcast: loud
status: accepted
category: manuscripts
excerpt: ""
permalink: /publication/2026-01-12-GCA-Nb
authors: "<strong>Bin Hu</strong>, Barbara Etschmann, Denis Testemale, Huan Chen, Richen Zhong, Andrew G. Tomkins, Harald Müller, Wei Li, Angela Isaura Santos Costa, Joël Brugger."
venue: "Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta"
date: 2026-01-12
---

'Niobium (Nb) is classified as a ‘critical mineral’ due to its irreplaceable applications in superalloys and superconductors but limited supply chain. This study employs high-energy resolution fluorescence-detected X-ray absorption spectroscopy (HERFD-XAS) at the Nb K-edge to investigate Nb(V) mobility in fluids containing various ligands, namely fluoride [F<sup>- </sup>], chloride [Cl<sup>- </sup>], carbonate [CO<sub>3</sub><sup>- </sup>], and hydroxide [NaOH], under hydrothermal conditions (25-413˚C; 800 bar). Ab initio simulations of X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra were combined with shell-by-shell modelling of extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) data to elucidate the nature and geometry of the aqueous Nb(V) complexes. Key findings are that Nb(V) predominantly forms eight-coordinated hydroxyfluoride complexes (e.g., [NbF<sub>6</sub>O<sub>2</sub>] moiety) in acidic F-rich solutions, whereas high-chloride acidic conditions favour six-coordinated chlorohydroxy complexes (e.g., [NbCl<sub>4</sub>O<sub>2</sub>] moiety). Competitive ligand interactions between F<sup>- </sup> and Cl<sup>- </sup> are modulated by temperature and pH, with higher temperature or low pH promoting Cl-dominated coordination. Carbonate solutions exhibit retrograde Nb solubility and promote lower solubility than acidic F/Cl solutions above 282˚C, with spectral features suggesting the presence of [NbO<sub>6</sub>]-like moieties in polynuclear clusters and/or nanoparticles. Comparative analysis with tantalum (Ta) highlights distinct geochemical behaviours: Ta dissolution depends strictly on F concentration, whereas Nb demonstrates greater coordination flexibility in Cl-bearing solution systems. These findings challenge conventional views that dismiss the role of chloride in Nb transport. Differences in Nb and Ta complexation provide a geochemical discriminator, leading to Nb/Ta ratios that are low near intrusions, increase outwards in intrusion-related hydrothermal systems, and are highest in metamorphic fluids.'